docs: ADR-043 Base NFT Module (#9329)
cosmos/cosmos-sdk: docs/architecture/adr-043-nft-module.md

# ADR 43: NFT Module

## Changelog

- 05.05.2021: Initial Draft

## Status

DRAFT

## Abstract

This ADR defines a generic NFT module of `x/nft` which supports NFTs as a `proto.Any` and contains `NFT` as the default implementation.

## Context
``

> NFTs are more digital assets than only crypto arts, which is very helpful for accruing value to ATOM. As a result, Cosmos Hub should implement NFT functions and enable a unified mechanism for storing and sending the ownership representative of NFTs ss discussed in https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/discussions/9065.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NFTs are more digital assets than only crypto arts, which is very helpful for accruing value to ATOM. As a result, Cosmos Hub should implement NFT functions and enable a unified mechanism for storing and sending the ownership representative of NFTs as discussed in https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/discussions/9065.
```

Considering generic usage and compatibility of interchain protocols including IBC and Gravity Bridge, it is preferred to have a very simple NFT module design which only stores NFTs by id and owner. 

This design idea can enable composability that application-specific functions should be managed by other modules on Cosmos Hub or on other Zones by importing the NFT module.

For example, NFTs can be grouped into collections in a collectibles module to define the behaviors such as minting, burning, transferring, etc.

The current design is based on the work done by [IRISnet team](https://github.com/irisnet/irismod/tree/master/modules/nft) and an older implementation in the [Cosmos repository](https://github.com/cosmos/modules/tree/master/incubator/nft).

## Decision

We will create a module `x/nft` which only stores NFTs by id and owner.

The interface for the `x/nft` module:

```go
// NFT is an interface used to store NFTs at a given id.
type NFT interface {
    GetId() string // define a simple identifier for the NFT 
    GetOwner() sdk.AccAddress // the current owner's address

>     GetData() string // specialized metadata to accompany the nft

Reviewer 2: If this references metadata, I'd call it that.

Reviewer 3: My thinking is that `Data` can include metadata, such as provenance, that'd be useful for some service down the line. As well, the field could contain actual nft data (e.g., hash or seed for generators). It'd be up to each NFT module to specify and interpret its contents. For this `x/nft` module, the value in this field doesn't provide additional context required to manage nft records. Although this means that technically the field can be removed, I think there's value in specifying the field to provide a place for basic informational/UI purposes.

Reviewer 2: I would make note of that then because this ADR only seems to address metadata as the primary use case.

    can be used in association with existing Hub attributes, e.g., defining an NFT's identifier as an immutable Hub address allows its integration into existing Hub account management modules. 
    We envision that identifiers can accommodate mint and transfer actions. 
  * Owner: This mutable field represents the current account owner (on the Hub) of the NFT, i.e., the account that will have authorization
    to perform various activities in the future. This can be a user, a module account, or potentially a future NFT module that adds capabilities.
  * Data: This mutable field allows for attaching pertinent metadata to the NFT, e.g., to record special parameter change upon transferring or criteria being met.
    The data field is used to maintain special information, such as name and URI. Currently, there is no convention for the data placed into this field,
    however, best practices recommend defining clear specifications that apply to each specific NFT type.

We will also create `NFT` as the default implementation of the `NFT` interface:
```proto
message NFT {
  option (gogoproto.equal) = true;

  string id    = 1;
  string owner = 2;
  string data  = 3;
}
```

> Queries functions for `NFT` is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The query service methods for the `x/nft` module are:
```

    to perform various activities in the future. This can be a user, a module account, or potentially a future NFT module that adds capabilities.
    Owner is also the secondary index for storing NFT IDs owned by an address
    ```
    owner (address) --> []string
    ```
  * Data: This mutable field allows attaching special information to the NFT, for example:
    * metadata such as title of the work and URI
    * immutable data and parameters (such actual NFT data, hash or seed for generators)
    * mutable data and parameters that change when transferring or when certain criteria are met (such as provenance)
      
    This ADR doesn't specify values that this field can take; however, best practices recommend upper-level NFT modules clearly specify its contents.
    Although the value of this field doesn't provide additional context required to manage NFT records, which means that the field can technically be removed from the specification, 
    the field's existence allows basic informational/UI functionality.

The logic for transferring the ownership of an NFT to another address (no coins involved) should also be defined in this module
```go

> func (k Keeper) TransferOwnership(nftID string, currentOwner, newOwner sdk.AccAddress) error

Author: We only define this method in the keeper to execute general logic without a `Msg`, the `Msg` should be defined in the upper-level/app-specific specific module.

> func (k Keeper) TransferOwnership(nftID string, currentOwner, newOwner sdk.AccAddress) error

Reviewer 4: With Protobuf service oriented architecture (which we are using since Stargate), we are exposing module interfaces through Protobuf services. Keeper is rather used as an internal data access layer. 

So, since Stargate we want to use Proto definitions for module interface, and Keeper if you want to talk about internal data layout in the store.
See ADR-30 (authz module) for an example.

> func (k Keeper) TransferOwnership(nftID string, currentOwner, newOwner sdk.AccAddress) error

Reviewer 4: ADR-33 is still in active development. I think ADR-30 will give you a good example. Also, as mentioned in other comment, for events please look at ADR-32

    to perform various activities in the future. This can be a user, a module account, or potentially a future NFT module that adds capabilities.
    Owner is also the secondary index for storing NFT IDs owned by an address
    ```
    owner (address) --> []string
    ```
  * Data: This mutable field allows for attaching pertinent metadata to the NFT, e.g., to record special parameter change upon transferring or criteria being met.
    The data field is used to maintain special information, such as name and URI. Currently, there is no convention for the data placed into this field,
    however, best practices recommend defining clear specifications that apply to each specific NFT type.

The logic for transferring the ownership of an NFT to another address (no coins involved) should also be defined in this module
```go
func (k Keeper) TransferOwnership(nftID string, currentOwner, newOwner sdk.AccAddress) error
```

Other behaviors of NFT, including minting, burning and other business-logic implementation should be defined in other upper-level modules that import this NFT module.

We will also create `BaseNFT` as the default implementation of the `NFT` interface:
```proto

> message BaseNFT {
>   option (gogoproto.equal) = true;
> 
>   string id    = 1;
>   string owner = 2;
>   string data  = 3;
> }

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
message NFT {
  string id    = 1;
  string owner = 2;
  google.protobuf.Any data  = 3;
}
```

This would seem more logical rather than wrapping every `NFT` in an `Any`.

Author: Yes, it's more logical, I applied it.

# ADR 43: NFT Module

## Changelog

- 05.05.2021: Initial Draft

## Status

DRAFT

## Abstract

This ADR defines a generic NFT module of `x/nft` which supports NFTs as a `proto.Any` and contains `NFT` as the default implementation.

## Context

> ``

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion

```

For example, NFTs can be grouped into collections in a collectibles module to define the behaviors such as minting, burning, etc.

The current design is based on the work done by [IRISnet team](https://github.com/irisnet/irismod/tree/master/modules/nft) and an older implementation in the [Cosmos repository](https://github.com/cosmos/modules/tree/master/incubator/nft).

## Decision

We will create a module `x/nft`, which provides the most basic storage, query functions for other upper-level modules to call. This module implements the OCAP security model in the [ADR 033](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/master/docs/architecture/adr-033-protobuf-inter-module-comm.md) protocol.

### Types

We define a general NFT model and `x/nft` module only stores NFTs by id and owner.

```go
type NFT struct{
  string id    = 1;
  string owner = 2;
  Data data    = 3;
}

// Data defines a minimum funtion set consistent with `ERC721Metadata` interface.
type Data interface {
  Name() string // A descriptive name for a collection of NFTs
  Symbol() string // An abbreviated name for NFTs
  URI() string // A distinct Uniform Resource Identifier (URI) for a given asset

> }

Reviewer 7: If a DID is used for the Denom, this would provide:
1. A URI for locating the root NFT (in a chain namespace and specific Cosmos module or Ethereum smart contract address)
2. A URI for dereferencing the token metadata, if this is stored in the format of a DID document (on or off-chain)
3. A metadata and control model which is compatible with DIDs and all the related family of specs and tooling (as specified for Interchain Identifiers which includes properties for linked resources, services, verification relationships, verification methods and accorded rights)
4. A portable standards-based token identifier which can be transferred across networks
5. An identifier which can be used for a wide range of DID-related applications and services, such as attestations about the token, authentication and control, delegable authorisation capabilities, etc. 
6. A very large name-space for token Denoms

Whilst these are desirable benefits, implementers could still have the option of using traditional Denoms, with Monikers, or other alternatives. 

Does the Denom really have to be a moniker? With the ERC1155 Token Multi-standard we see a pattern of moving the human-readable identifiers and related metadata relative to the token and not intrinsic. This solves the issue of localisation by allowing for variations of the token identity in respect to different languages and representations. 
It also allows for a large number of tokens to use the same on-chain string by defining a (DID) URI once, for that large number of tokens. 

Adding DID fragments could allow for multiple fungible tokens to be associated with a base NFT. For instance `DID:IXO:NFT:123#shares` for tokens that represent shares in the fractional ownership of an NFT and a separate token `DID:IXO:NFT:123#governance` that enables governance functions related to the NFT.

Tying a supply of (one or more) fungible token sets with a DID Denom in Bank to the same non-fungible token Denom in baseNFT would enable fractional shares of an NFT to be issued in a way that the non-fungible asset is directly linked to its fungible derivatives. This seems to be a core requirement for many NFT use-cases. Services for functions such as `deriveShares` could then be added through application-specific customisations of baseNFT, or delivered by other modules or external services.

The bank module now allows long strings for Denom, so this should not limit using a DID for denom. However, there could be an implementation restriction with this approach as standard Regex does not allow colons as used in DID uri's From what I understand, this can be over-ridden. But is the Regex over-write on one chain likely to break on another chain when a DID Denom gets IBC transferred (may relate to #7027)?

> }

Reviewer 4: @ig-shaun  thanks for the great comment. I used it in the alternative design for NFT which is derived from the comments here, please have a look here: https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/discussions/9065#discussioncomment-873206

  ```
  {class_id}/{id} --> NFT (bytes)
  ```
- `uri` is a URL pointing to an off-chain JSON file that contains metadata about this NFT (Ref: [ERC721 standard and OpenSea extension](https://docs.opensea.io/docs/metadata-standards)); _required_
- `data` is a field that CAN be used by composing modules to specify additional properties for the NFT; _optional_

This ADR doesn't specify values that `data` can take; however, best practices recommend upper-level NFT modules clearly specify their contents.  Although the value of this field doesn't provide the additional context required to manage NFT records, which means that the field can technically be removed from the specification, the field's existence allows basic informational/UI functionality.

### `Keeper` Interface

```go
type Keeper interface {
  NewClass(class Class)
  UpdateClass(class Class)

  Mint(nft NFT，receiver sdk.AccAddress)   // updates totalSupply
  Burn(classId string, nftId string)    // updates totalSupply

>   Update(nft NFT)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  Update(nft NFT)
```

We need to be very careful about how this `Update` method is used if ICS30 transfers metadata. Basically once an NFT is escrowed, metadata would be locked. If there is a module who's logic allows a minter (not owner) of an NFT to modify the metadata, that could result in an inconsistent state.

  cosmos.base.query.v1beta1.PageResponse pagination = 2;
}

// QueryNFTRequest is the request type for the Query/NFT RPC method
message QueryNFTRequest {
  string class_id = 1;
  string id       = 2;
}

// QueryNFTResponse is the response type for the Query/NFT RPC method
message QueryNFTResponse {
  cosmos.nft.v1beta1.NFT nft = 1;
}

// QueryClassRequest is the request type for the Query/Class RPC method
message QueryClassRequest {
  string class_id = 1;
}

// QueryClassResponse is the response type for the Query/Class RPC method
message QueryClassResponse {
  cosmos.nft.v1beta1.Class class = 1;
}

// QueryClassesRequest is the request type for the Query/Classes RPC method
message QueryClassesRequest {
  // pagination defines an optional pagination for the request.
  cosmos.base.query.v1beta1.PageRequest pagination = 1;
}

// QueryClassesResponse is the response type for the Query/Classes RPC method
message QueryClassesResponse {
  repeated cosmos.nft.v1beta1.Class      classes    = 1;
  cosmos.base.query.v1beta1.PageResponse pagination = 2;
}
```

## Consequences

### Backward Compatibility

No backward incompatibilities.

### Forward Compatibility

> This specification conforms to the ERC-721 smart contract specification for NFT identifiers. Note that ERC-721 defines uniqueness based on (contract address, uint256 tokenId), and we conform to this implicitly because a single module is currently aimed to track NFT identifiers. Note: use of the (mutable) data field to determine uniqueness is not safe.s

Reviewer 4: So maybe we should change the language and use:
_This specification follows the ERC-721 [link needed!] smart contract standard...._

Also, an ERC-721 implementer has more choices (he creates a  new smart contract for every ERC-721 token), here he can't do that.

### Positive

> - NFT identifiers available on Cosmos Hub.

Reviewer 4: Without IID, the NFT identifier is not different from bank identifier and can be confused.

- irismod/nft and modules/incubator/nft
- CW721
- DID NFTs
- interNFT

Since NFTs functions/use cases are tightly connected with their logic, it is almost impossible to support all the NFTs' use cases in one Cosmos SDK module by defining and implementing different transaction types.

Considering generic usage and compatibility of interchain protocols including IBC and Gravity Bridge, it is preferred to have a generic NFT module design which handles the generic NFTs logic.

This design idea can enable composability that application-specific functions should be managed by other modules on Cosmos Hub or on other Zones by importing the NFT module.

The current design is based on the work done by [IRISnet team](https://github.com/irisnet/irismod/tree/master/modules/nft) and an older implementation in the [Cosmos repository](https://github.com/cosmos/modules/tree/master/incubator/nft).

## Decision

We will create a module `x/nft`, which contains the following functionality:

- Store and transfer NFTs utilizing `x/bank`.
- Mint and burn NFTs.
- Use `x/authz` to implement ERC721-style authorization.
- Query NFTs and their supply information.

> 

Reviewer 4: Please describe more the proposal and motivation behind the decision as we were discussing. If you want I can push to your PR, or do another one once this will be merged. We can use some text from https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/discussions/9065#discussioncomment-873206

### Types

#### Metadata

We define a `Metadata` model for `NFT Type`, which is comparable to an ERC721 contract on Ethereum, under which a collection of `NFT`s can be created and managed.

```protobuf

> message Metadata {

Reviewer 4: Shall we rename it to `TypeMetadata`?

  string type          = 1; // Required, unique key, alphanumeric
  string name          = 2;
  string symbol        = 3;
  string description   = 4;
  bool mint_restricted = 5;
  bool edit_restricted = 6;

> }

Reviewer 4: shall we add `string uri` attribute - to link a document with more details?

```

- The `type` is the identifier of the NFT type/class.
- The `name` is a descriptive name of this NFT type.

> - The `symbol` is the symbol usually shown on exchanges for this NFT type.

Reviewer 4: why NFT type / class needs a symbol? Could you update the PR and provide a bit more background?

- The `description` is a detailed description of this NFT type.
- The `mint_restricted` flag, if set to true, indicates that only the issuer of this type can mint NFTs for it.
- The `edit_restricted` flag, if set to true, indicates that NFTs of this type cannot be edited once minted.

#### NFT

We define a general model for `NFT` as follows.

```protobuf
message NFT {
  string type              = 1; // The type of this NFT

>   string id                = 2; // The identifier of this NFT

Reviewer 4: is `id` going to be in-chain unique? Or only `(type, id)` pair is unique? Please add more details to the ADR.

  string uri               = 3; 
  google.protobuf.Any data = 4;
}
```

The NFT conforms to the following specifications:

> - The `id` is an immutable field used as a unique identifier within the scope of an NFT type. It is specified by the creator of the NFT and may be expanded to use DID in the future. NFT identifiers don't currently have a naming convention but can be used in association with existing Hub attributes, e.g., defining an NFT's identifier as an immutable Hub address allows its integration into existing Hub account management modules.

Reviewer 4: How about this:
```suggestion
- The `id` is an immutable field used as a unique identifier within the scope of an NFT type. It can be automatically managed or specified by the creator of the NFT. `id` can be a DID. NFT identifiers don't currently have a naming convention but can be used in association with existing Hub attributes, e.g., defining an NFT's identifier as an immutable Hub address allows its integration into existing Hub account management modules.
```

  We envision that identifiers can accommodate mint and transfer actions.
  The `id` is also the primary index for storing NFTs.

  ```

>   {type}/{id} --> NFT (bytes)

Reviewer 4: so we are going to repeat the key in the value? Maybe we can create a new structure `NFT'` without the `type` and `id` attributes to save some storage space. And then when loading we will pack both key and value in the `NFT` structure.

>   ```

Reviewer 4: Let's add a paragraph about `denom`. Below you define that the denom will be `type-id`. I suggest that we use denom as a key and use the same format (eg above it's `type/id` vs `type-id`).

> - The `uri` points to an immutable off-chain resource containing more attributes about his NFT.

Reviewer 4: as already noted, shall use `x/bank` planned `uri` attribute?

  the field's existence allows basic informational/UI functionality.

- The ownership of nft is controlled by the `x/bank` module and the `metadata` part will be converted to `banktypes.Metadata` is stored in the `x/bank` module.

### `Msg` Service

```protobuf
service Msg {
  rpc Issue(MsgIssue) returns (MsgIssueResponse);
  rpc Mint(MsgMint)   returns (MsgMintResponse);
  rpc Edit(MsgEdit)   returns (MsgEditResponse);
  rpc Send(MsgSend)   returns (MsgMsgSendResponse);
  rpc Burn(MsgBurn)   returns (MsgBurnResponse);
}

message MsgIssue {
  cosmos.nft.v1beta1.Metadata metadata = 1;
  string issuer                        = 2;
}
message MsgIssueResponse {}

message MsgMint {
  cosmos.nft.v1beta1.NFT nft = 1;
  string minter              = 2;
}
message MsgMintResponse {}

message MsgEdit {
  cosmos.nft.v1beta1.NFT nft = 1;
  string editor              = 2;
}
message MsgEditResponse {}

message MsgSend {
  string type     = 1;
  string id       = 2;
  string sender   = 3;
  string reveiver = 4;
}
message MsgSendResponse {}

message MsgBurn {
  string type      = 1;
  string id        = 2;
  string destroyer = 3;
}
message MsgBurnResponse {}
```

> `MsgIssue` can be used to issue an NFT type/class, just like deploying an ERC721 contract on Ethereum.

Reviewer 4: IMHO `Issue` is confusing with `Mint`. Can we rename `MsgIssue` to `MsgNewType` (feel free to propose other name).

`MsgMint` allows users to create new NFTs for a given type.

`MsgEdit` allows users to edit/update their NFTs.

`MsgSend` can be used to transfer the ownership of an NFT to another address.

> **Note**: we could use `x/bank` to handle NFT transfer directly and do without this service. It's only for the sake of completeness of an ERC721 compatible API that we may choose to keep this service.

Reviewer 4: I forgot to add a comment: I think we don't need `MsgSend` - `x/bank` MsgSend works perfectly well.

`MsgBurn` allows users to destroy their NFTs.

Other business logic implementations should be defined in other upper-level modules that import this NFT module. The implementation example of the server is as follows:

```go
type msgServer struct{
  k Keeper
}

func (m msgServer) Issue(ctx context.Context, msg *types.MsgIssue) (*types.MsgIssueResponse, error) {
  m.keeper.AssertTypeNotExist(msg.Metadata.Type)

>   bz := m.keeper.cdc.MustMarshalBinaryBare(msg.Metadata)
>   typeStore := m.keeper.getTypeStore(ctx)
>   typeStore.Set(msg.Type, bz)
>   
>   bz := m.keeper.cdc.MustMarshalBinaryBare(msg.Issuer)

Reviewer 4: We removed `BinaryBare` suffix in v0.43

```suggestion
  bz := m.keeper.cdc.MustMarshal(msg.Metadata)
  typeStore := m.keeper.getTypeStore(ctx)
  typeStore.Set(msg.Type, bz)
  
  bz := m.keeper.cdc.MustMarshal(msg.Issuer)
```

  typeOwnerStore := m.keeper.getTypeOwnerStore(ctx)
  typeOwnerStore.Set(msg.Type, bz)
  
  return &types.MsgIssueResponse{}, nil
}

func (m msgServer) Mint(ctx context.Context, msg *types.MsgMint) (*types.MsgMintResponse, error) {
  m.keeper.AssertTypeExist(msg.NFT.Type)
  m.keeper.AssertCanMint(msg.NFT.Type, msg.Minter)
  
  baseDenom := fmt.Sprintf("%s-%s", msg.NFT.Type, msg.NFT.Id)
  bkMetadata := bankTypes.Metadata{
    Symbol:      metadata.Symbol,
    Base:        baseDenom,
    Name:        metadata.Name,
    URI:         msg.NFT.URI,
    Description: metadata.Description,
  }
  
  m.keeper.bank.SetDenomMetaData(ctx, bkMetadata)
  mintedCoins := sdk.NewCoins(sdk.NewCoin(baseDenom, 1))
  m.keeper.bank.MintCoins(types.ModuleName, mintedCoins)

>   m.keeper.bank.SendCoinsFromModuleToAccount(types.ModuleName, msg.Owner, mintedCoins)

Reviewer 4: @aaronc  - shall we add a keeper function `bank.MintCoinsForAccount`?

  
  bz := m.keeper.cdc.MustMarshalBinaryBare(&msg.NFT)
  
  nftStoreByType := m.keeper.getNFTStoreByType(ctx, msg.NFT.Type)
  nftStoreByType.Set(msg.NFT.Id, bz)
  
  nftStore := m.keeper.getNFTStore(ctx)
  nftStore.Set(baseDenom, bz)
  

>   return &types.MsgMintResponse{}, nil

Reviewer 4: Do we need to provide the implementation details on the ADR level? How about using some pseudo-code? cc: @aaronc 

Eg:
```
Create denom = `type-id`
Create and bank.Metatadata using bank keeper
create a coin with total supply = 1 using bank keeper
create NFT' from msg.NFT
store NFT': nftStore.Set(denom, nft')
```

message QuerySupplyRequest{
  string type = 1;
}

// QuerySupplyResponse is the response type for the Query/Supply RPC method
message QuerySupplyResponse{
  uint64 amount = 1;
}

// QueryBalanceRequest is the request type for the Query/Balance RPC method
message QueryBalanceRequest{
  string owner = 1;
  string type  = 2;
}

// QueryBalanceResponse is the response type for the Query/Balance RPC method
message QueryBalanceResponse{
  uint64 amount = 1;
}

// QueryTypeRequest is the request type for the Query/Type RPC method
message QueryTypeRequest {
  string type = 1;
}

// QueryTypeResponse is the response type for the Query/Type RPC method
message QueryTypeResponse {
  cosmos.nft.v1beta1.Metadata metadata = 1;
}

// QueryTypesRequest is the request type for the Query/Types RPC method
message QueryTypesRequest {
  // pagination defines an optional pagination for the request.
  cosmos.base.query.v1beta1.PageRequest pagination = 1;
}

// QueryTypesResponse is the response type for the Query/Types RPC method
message QueryTypesResponse {
  repeated cosmos.nft.v1beta1.Metadata   metadatas = 1;
  cosmos.base.query.v1beta1.PageResponse pagination = 2;
}
```

> ## Consequences

Reviewer 4: since we  are basing this module on x/bank :) , shall we can add more consequences. Feel free to copy text from my post https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/discussions/9065#discussioncomment-873206

We will create a module `x/nft`, which contains the following functionality:

- Store NFTs and track their ownership.
- Expose `Keeper` interface for composing modules to mint and burn NFTs.
- Expose external `Message` interface for users to transfer ownership of their NFTs.
- Query NFTs and their supply information.

### Types

> #### Genre

Reviewer 8: Is there any reason not to use `Denom` instead of `Genre`? Not opposed to `Genre` beyond introducing new terminology when we already have terms that serve same or similar purpose.

Reviewer 7: If anything, to keep this aligned with already established terminology to token ontologies, I would recommend using
`class` to define a set of tokens which share the same properties and behaviours. E.g. "cryptokitties" or "did:cosmos:kittynet:nft:cryptokitties"
`denom` COULD be a class identifier property. E.g. "CAT-0001" or "did:cosmos:kittynet:nft:cryptokitties:cat-0001"
`collection` COULD be used as a sub-class tag. E.g. "Blue-eyed" or did:cosmos:kittynet:nft:cryptokitties#blue-eyed"

We define a model for NFT **Genre**, which is comparable to an ERC721 Contract on Ethereum, under which a collection of NFTs can be created and managed.

```protobuf
message Genre {
  string id              = 1;
  string name            = 2;
  string symbol          = 3;
  string description     = 4;
  string uri             = 5;
  bool mint_restricted   = 10;

>   bool update_restricted = 11;

Reviewer 8: are these necessary here? might want to hold off on the encumbrances for a separate ADR?

Reviewer 5: Agreed. The idea is to do a sophisticated encumbrance design rather than just stopgaps right? Also as I understand it the encumbrances should be declarative and queryable right?

Reviewer 9: > are these necessary here? might want to hold off on the encumbrances for a separate ADR?

Yes, it makes sense to have the app-level modules to enforce such encumbrances in ways that best suit their needs.

}
```

- `id` is an alphanumeric identifier of the NFT genre; it is used as the primary index for storing the genre; _required_
- `name` is a descriptive name of the NFT genre; _optional_
- `symbol` is the symbol usually shown on exchanges for the NFT genre; _optional_
- `description` is a detailed description of the NFT genre; _optional_
- `uri` is a URL pointing to an off-chain JSON file that contains metadata about this NFT genre ([OpenSea example](https://docs.opensea.io/docs/contract-level-metadata)); _optional_
- `mint_restricted` flag, if set to true, indicates that only the genre owner can mint NFTs, otherwise anyone can do so; _required_
- `udpate_restricted` flag, if set to true, indicates that no one can update NFTs, otherwise only NFT owners can do so; _required_

#### NFT

We define a general model for `NFT` as follows.

```protobuf
message NFT {
  string genre = 1;
  string id    = 2;
  string uri   = 3;

>   string data  = 10;

Reviewer 8: what was the reason to change from `protobuf.Any` to `string`?

Reviewer 9: > what was the reason to change from `protobuf.Any` to `string`?

Typo, will change back to protobuf.Any

This ADR doesn't specify values that `data` can take; however, best practices recommend upper-level NFT modules clearly specify their contents.  Although the value of this field doesn't provide the additional context required to manage NFT records, which means that the field can technically be removed from the specification, the field's existence allows basic informational/UI functionality.

### `Keeper` Interface (TODO)
Other business logic implementations should be defined in composing modules that import this NFT module and use its `Keeper`.

### `Msg` Service

```protobuf
service Msg {
  rpc Send(MsgSend)         returns (MsgSendResponse);
}

message MsgSend {
  string genre    = 1;
  string id       = 2;
  string sender   = 3;
  string reveiver = 4;
}
message MsgSendResponse {}

`MsgSend` can be used to transfer the ownership of an NFT to another address.

The implementation outline of the server is as follows:

```go
type msgServer struct{
  k Keeper
}

func (m msgServer) Send(ctx context.Context, msg *types.MsgSend) (*types.MsgSendResponse, error) {
  // check current ownership
  assertEqual(msg.Sender, m.k.GetNftOwner(msg.Genre, msg.Id))

  // change ownership mapping

>   m.k.SetNftOwner(msg.Genre, msg.Id, msg.Receiver)

Reviewer 8: Might be good to make this `m.k.TransferTo(msg.Genre, msg.Id, msg.Receiver)` to distinguish from `m.k.Mint(msg.Genre, msg.Id, msg.Receiver)` which should affect `totalSupply` whereas `TransferTo` doesn't.

```proto
service Query {

  // Balance queries the number of NFTs based on the genre and owner, same as balanceOf in ERC721
  rpc Balance(QueryBalanceRequest) returns (QueryBalanceResponse) {
    option (google.api.http).get = "/cosmos/nft/v1beta1/balance/{genre}/{owner}";
  }

  // Owner queries the owner of the NFT based on the genre and id, same as ownerOf in ERC721
  rpc Owner(QueryOwnerRequest) returns (QueryOwnerResponse) {
    option (google.api.http).get = "/cosmos/nft/v1beta1/owner/{genre}/{id}";
  }

  // Supply queries the number of NFTs based on the genre, same as totalSupply in ERC721Enumerable
  rpc Supply(QuerySupplyRequest) returns (QuerySupplyResponse) {
    option (google.api.http).get = "/cosmos/nft/v1beta1/supply/{genre}";
  }

  // NFTsOf queries all NFTs based on the genre, similar to tokenByIndex in ERC721Enumerable
  rpc NFTs(QueryNFTsRequest) returns (QueryNFTsResponse) {
    option (google.api.http).get = "/cosmos/nft/v1beta1/nfts/{genre}";
  }

  // NFTsOfOwner queries the NFTs based on the genre and owner, similar to tokenOfOwnerByIndex in ERC721Enumerable
  rpc NFTsOfOwner(QueryNFTsOfOwnerRequest) returns (QueryNFTsResponse) {

>     option (google.api.http).get = "/cosmos/nft/v1beta1/balance/{genre}/{owner}";

Reviewer 8: doesn't this route need to be distinguished from the same format used in `Owner(QueryOwnerRequest)`?
